𝐃𝐈𝐆𝐈𝐓𝐀𝐋 𝐍𝐎𝐌𝐀𝐃 – 𝐔𝐩𝐝𝐚𝐭𝐞𝐬 𝐉𝐮𝐥𝐲 𝟐𝟔, 𝐂𝐡𝐚𝐧𝐠𝐞𝐬 & 𝐑𝐞𝐧𝐞𝐰𝐚𝐥𝐬

The Director of the Digital Nomad office (UGE) gave a conference on Fri, 24 July in Madrid on the current changes, new requirements, technical issues, the increase in denials, and fraud. The first part of the conference explained the updates, and the second half consisted of questions and answers from the 50 people attending.



UPDATES

The Digital Nomad (DN) programme continues to be popular, with ever more people applying, the largest group being from Russia, followed by the USA. Due to the high numbers, the UGE is overwhelmed with applications and is trying to improve its system to manage applications, requests, appeals, silent approvals, requirements, etc. They are focusing on the main issues that affect most people and do not have time to spend on special cases, emails, etc.

OVERALL SYSTEM

They are working on updating software, improving connectivity with the Police for TIEs, Social Security, the MoFA and the EES system. These changes require several steps, agreements with other government bodies, and can take time to put in place. Some examples mentioned include: more detailed resolutions with Reg number reference, TIE appointments assigned automatically, and from October, AI reading passports.

TECHNICAL ISSUES

This is more behind the scenes and useful for lawyers and professionals who process applications. Improvements include a better upload interface, the phasing out of full passport scans, address issues, blank sections of forms, parent name conflicts with TIEs, etc. Soon there will be new application forms to make them easier to process, as well as a one-page form for all family members.

FRAUD

This has become a major issue, with fake documents. The National Police have also confirmed this is happening broadly in all immigration applications, with estimates of hundreds of thousands of documents being falsified.

This has two consequences:

• The UGE has become very strict on documentation and insists on documents being government-issued and apostilled or, for bank documents, signed or stamped to prove authenticity. They are aware this is a problem for some countries to obtain these documents but cannot adapt for every country.

• Immigration lawyers/DN specialists are very wary of a client having fake documents. One client having one fake document can throw into doubt all previous applications submitted and lead to a review of all files.

DENIALS.

These continue to rise for the above reasons and also because people are using out-of-date lists, making mistakes on application forms, tasas, submitting missing documents, missing parts of documents, etc. As they are heavily overloaded, if the application is not perfect, it has a higher chance of being directly denied.

APPEALS

There are huge numbers of appeals, most with very little chance of approval. Unfortunately, many gestors or lawyers unfamiliar with the Digital Nomad programme and the UGE offer this as a solution to a badly presented application. In 2025, there were 3 people working on renewals, and now, even with 12 people working on them, it is not enough, and there will be delays.



CHANGES

DIGITAL NOMAD INITIAL APPLICATIONS

a. Bank Statements

They must be either signed by the bank, rubber-stamped by the bank, or notarised. Notary declarations are accepted. One bank certificate/summary can be used for all other bank statements of the same account owner and account.



b. Physical Copies

The UGE may request an applicant to present the original paper document to verify it is genuine. The UGE has never had to do this before.



c. Three Years' Experience

Despite rumours, a work contract by itself is not complete proof of that experience. A government-issued document is required, preferably a work life history, apostilled and translated.

d. Sole Business Owners

While technically you can apply as the owner of your own business, it causes a conflict with the paperwork (work contract), implies you are at the place of business, and later creates issues with taxes. Third-party contracts are required with business clients, together with all supporting documentation. Applying as a contractor or employee is the more straightforward option.



e. Job Title

Any job title or description related to running the production or employees of a company is considered to involve, at least in part, on-site work. Senior management, HR, production, facility management, etc., all imply being where the action is, at the office.

A General Manager of a bakery, production plant, or store is not a "remote" job. Marketing, accounting, or software development at the same bakery could be.



f. Autónomo (Self-Employed) Registration

Self-employed individuals are expected to register within a very short period after approval. The Director mentioned this can technically be done within 48 hours (??) and without the need for a Digital Certificate. Basically, when approved, register quickly and keep all appointments (citas) and receipts to show you are in the process.



DIGITAL NOMAD RENEWALS

a. Streamlined if the Same Company

If you work for the same company with the same contract as the original application, the renewal is more straightforward and much less supporting documentation is needed.

If you have changed client or employer, it is like an original application, with all the documents required relating to the new business client/employer.



b. Two Years of Tax Returns Are Required

This is for two reasons:

• Many people originally applied, were approved, left Spain, and remained outside the country for most of the time. These people will now not be able to renew.

• To check that your gross income meets the minimum requirements. Many people applied and then reduced their income to only a few hundred euros per month.



c. Autónomo Registration Soon After Initial Approval

This is a major change and was not a requirement originally. However, many people are receiving this requirement. There is no exact time given for how long is considered too long, but there have been at least five reports of people who took four months to register being asked to provide an explanation.

There are solutions to this issue, but they depend on the individual case and what has happened.

The initial registration can be backdated. Many gestors do not know how to do this, and it can take 2–3 weeks, with fines and back payments due. If you receive this requirement, it can be very stressful, so it is better to be prepared.

NOTE: If you are denied for this reason and later backdate the registration, you can request approval.

If you have documentation to show why you delayed (appointments, Social Security requirements, etc.), this can be used to justify the delay.

There are other solutions depending on your situation, whether you work as an employee or contractor, whether there was a break in your application, etc. Check with your DN specialist.



SUMMARY

• Use an updated checklist.

• Have a consultation with an experienced Digital Nomad professional.

• Don't cut corners or assume the UGE will make an exception or understand why you do not have a document. Provide exactly what is required in the format they require.

• Don't apply directly as a business owner. If this is recommended, get a second opinion.

• If renewing, check when you registered as an autonomo. If it was more than 4 months after approval, check what it would take to correct the gap.